col.markdown, before:

---
layout: default
title: Col
---

# Col

* This list will contain the table of contents
{:toc}

## Name

Col -- high-level console color formatting

## Synopsis

{% highlight ruby %}
    require 'col'

    puts Col("Hello world!").red.bold
    puts Col("Hello world!").rb
    puts Col("Hello world!").fmt [:red, :bold]
    puts Col("Hello world!").fmt :rb

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt :red, :green
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt "r,g"

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt [:red, :bold], [:green, :bold]
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt "rb,gb"

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt [:bold], [:cyan, :italic, :on_white]
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt "_b,ciow"

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt [:blue, :on_yellow], [:on_green]
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt "b_oy,__og"

    puts Col.inline( "Hello ", :red, "world!", :blue )

    puts Col.inline(
      "Hello ",   [:red, :bold, :on_white],
      "world!",   :b_oy
    )

{% endhighlight %}


## Installation

    $ [sudo] gem install col

Source-code access is via Github.  See [Project details](#project_details).

## Description

Col offers high-level access to the ANSI codes used to create colorful output on
the console.  It is optimised for dealing with multiple strings at once,
applying different color formatting to each string.  It does not add any methods
to the String class.

For simple console-coloring requirements, there is little or nothing to be
gained from using Col instead of Term::ANSIColor.

If formatting a single string, you can send the method names directly, or use
their abbreviation if applicable:

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col("Hello world!").red.bold.on_white
    puts Col("Hello world!").rbow

    puts Col("Hello world!").bold.italic.strikethrough
    # No abbreviation for this

{% endhighlight %}

If formatting multiple strings, you are limited to using the `fmt` method.

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt [:red, :bold], [:green, :bold]
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt :rb, :gb
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt "rb,rg"

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt [:italic, :underline], [:green, :on_white]
    # No abbreviation for [:italic, :underline]
{% endhighlight %}

Abbreviations are available if the format you wish to use comprises:
* at most one foreground color
* at most one style
* at most one background color

See [Abbreviations](#abbreviations) below for details.


### Classes, methods, return values

`Col(...)` and `Col[...]` create a `Col` object, whose only interesting methods are
`fmt` (to apply formatting) and `to_s`.  Any other method will be interpreted as
a format specifier.

`Col#fmt` returns a `String`:

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("string").fmt :red, :bold, :on_white    # -> String
    Col("string").fmt "rbow"                    # -> String
    Col("string").fmt :rbow                     # -> String
    Col("str1", "str2").fmt :rb, gi             # -> String

{% endhighlight %}

Directly-applied formatting methods return a `Col` object:

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("string").red                           # -> Col
    Col("string").red.bold                      # -> Col
    Col("string").red.bold.underscore.italic    # -> Col

{% endhighlight %}

Because `Col#to_s` is implemented, you can use `puts` directly on a `Col`
object:

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col("string").red.bold

{% endhighlight %}

Directly-applied _abbreviated_ formatting methods return a `String`:

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("string").rbow                          # -> String
      # internally converted to
      #   Col("string).fmt :red, :bold, :on_white

{% endhighlight %}

Incorrect use of Col results in a `Col::Error` being raised:

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("string").turquoise                    # non-existent format
    Col("one", "two).fmt :red, :green, :cyan   # too many arguments
    Col("string").gZow                         # invalid style: Z

{% endhighlight %}

### Abbreviations

Here are some illustrative examples of abbreviations you can use with `col`.

          Code             Effect(s) applied
     ---------------      -------------------
     Col["..."].g         green
     Col["..."].gb        green bold
     Col["..."]._b        bold
     Col["..."].gbow      green bold on_white
     Col["..."].g_ow      green on_white
     Col["..."].__ow      on_white
   
These examples show that the abbreviations are positional.  If you only want to
specify `on_white`, you must use underscores for the color and style properties.

Using these abbreviations, you can apply at most one color, at most one style,
and at most one background color.  These are listed in full here:

{% highlight ruby %}

    COLORS = {              STYLES = {                    BACKGROUND = {        
      'B' => :black,          'b' => :bold,                 'oB' => :on_black,  
      'r' => :red,            'd' => :dark,                 'or' => :on_red,    
      'g' => :green,          'i' => :italic,               'og' => :on_green,  
      'y' => :yellow,         'u' => :underline,            'oy' => :on_yellow, 
      'b' => :blue,           'U' => :underscore,           'ob' => :on_blue,   
      'm' => :magenta,        'k' => :blink,                'om' => :on_magenta,
      'c' => :cyan,           'r' => :rapid_blink,          'oc' => :on_cyan,   
      'w' => :white           'n' => :negative,             'ow' => :on_white   
    }                         'c' => :concealed,          }                     
                              's' => :strikethrough,
                            }                       

{% endhighlight %}
    
Note the following solutions to abbreviation clashes:

* `b` for blue, `B` for black
* `u` for underline, `U` for underscore
* `b` for bold; `k` for blink.

### Unabbreviated usage

Col is designed to make colorising a string (or collection of strings) easy, and
is optimised for the common case of applying a single color, a single style and
a background color.  If you need to apply more than one style to a single
string, you can send them all as methods:

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("text...").rapid_blink.strikethrough.negative.cyan

{% endhighlight %}

Or you can pass all of them, in full, to the `fmt` method.

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("text...").fmt [:rapid_blink, :strikethrough, :negative, :cyan]

{% endhighlight %}

If you are using `Col` to format a number of strings, `fmt` is your only option.

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("one", "two", "three").fmt(
      [:green, :bold, :underline, :italic, :on_yellow],
      [:blue, :strikethrough, :dark, :blink],
      [:red]
    )

{% endhighlight %}

Naturally, the need for such usage should be extremely rare!

### Formatting multiple strings

Assuming your formatting needs are straightforward, the most convenient way to
format multiple strings is with a comma-separated format specification.

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col(str1, str2, ...).fmt "f1,f2,..."

{% endhighlight %}

For example:

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col("Name: ", name, "Age: ", age).fmt "y,rb,y,rb"

    # Equivalent to:
    puts Col("Name: ",  name,           "Age: ",   age           ).fmt \
             :yellow,   [:red, :bold],  :yellow,   [:red, :bold]

{% endhighlight %}

An alternative is to provide a list of strings or symbols:

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col("Name: ", name, "Age: ", age).fmt('y', 'rb', 'y', 'rb')
    puts Col("Name: ", name, "Age: ", age).fmt(:y, :rb, :y, :rb)

{% endhighlight %}

### Inline usage

An alternative way to format multiple strings is to use `Col.inline`.

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col.inline( str1, fmt1, str2, fmt2, ... )

{% endhighlight %}

For example:

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col.inline( "Hello ", :red, "world!", :blue)

    puts Col.inline(
      "Hello ",   [:red, :bold, :on_white],
      "world!",   :b_oy
    )

{% endhighlight %}

### Removing color codes from a string

`Col.uncolored` or `Col.plain` will remove any ANSI color codes from a string.

{% highlight ruby %}

    str = Col["foo"].yellow.bold.on_red.to_s
    Col.uncolored(str) == "foo"                 # true

{% endhighlight %}

### Windows users

People using a native Windows build of Ruby in the Windows console should
include the following code in their program:

{% highlight ruby %}

    require 'win32console'           # win32console gem
    include Win32::Console::ANSI

{% endhighlight %}

This does not apply to Cygwin users.

## Limitations

Col uses [Term::ANSIColor][1] to access ANSI codes, and offers access to all of
its codes/features _except_ `reset`.

[1]: http://flori.github.com/term-ansicolor/

The author of this library never applies anything other than a foreground color
and 'bold', so everything else is tested only in unit tests, not in practice.
Furthermore, the author has no knowledge of terminal issues and is just happy to
see a few colors appear in his Ruby 1.8 and 1.9 (Cygwin) programs -- no other
environment has been tested!


## Endnotes

### History

July 25 2010: Version 1.0 released.

### Credits

Florian Flank for [Term::ANSIColor][1], which I've used heavily over the years.

### Motivation

I've used Term::ANSIColor many times and never sought anything more, but while
developing Attest, which makes much use of console color, I wanted an easier way
to apply color codes to groups of strings.  Additionally, being a unit testing
library, I didn't want to add methods to the String class, the way I normally do
when using Term::ANSIColor.

### Project details

* Author: Gavin Sinclair (user name: `gsinclair`; mail server: `gmail.com`)
* Date: July 2010
* Licence: MIT licence
* Project homepage: [http://gsinclair.github.com/col.html][home]
* Source code: [http://github.com/gsinclair/col][code]
* Documentation: [project homepage](home)

[home]: http://gsinclair.github.com/col.html
[code]: http://github.com/gsinclair/col

### Future plans

Hopefully nothing in the code will need to change.  Bug fixes will be released
as version 1.0.1, 1.0.2 etc.  If any extra functionality is needed, it will be
in 1.1.0, 1.2.0 etc.

One possible area of enhancement is to provide a way of disabling colored output
when outputing to a pipe.  (I believe Term::ANSIColor may already do that.)
(Sometimes, however, colored output in a pipe is desirable, viz. git.)

Commit message:

Col updated to v1.0.1. Slight change to doc page.

col.markdown, after:

---
layout: default
title: Col
---

# Col

* This list will contain the table of contents
{:toc}

## Name

Col -- high-level console color formatting

## Synopsis

{% highlight ruby %}
    require 'col'

    puts Col("Hello world!").red.bold
    puts Col("Hello world!").rb
    puts Col("Hello world!").fmt [:red, :bold]
    puts Col("Hello world!").fmt :rb

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt :red, :green
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt "r,g"

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt [:red, :bold], [:green, :bold]
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt "rb,gb"

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt [:bold], [:cyan, :italic, :on_white]
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt "_b,ciow"

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt [:blue, :on_yellow], [:on_green]
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt "b_oy,__og"

    puts Col.inline( "Hello ", :red, "world!", :blue )

    puts Col.inline(
      "Hello ",   [:red, :bold, :on_white],
      "world!",   :b_oy
    )

{% endhighlight %}


## Installation

    $ [sudo] gem install col

Source-code access is via Github.  See [Project details](#project_details).

## Description

Col offers high-level access to the ANSI codes used to create colorful output on
the console.  It is optimised for dealing with multiple strings at once,
applying different color formatting to each string.  It does not add any methods
to the String class.

For simple console-coloring requirements, there is little or nothing to be
gained from using Col instead of Term::ANSIColor.

If formatting a single string, you can send the method names directly, or use
their abbreviation if applicable:

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col("Hello world!").red.bold.on_white
    puts Col("Hello world!").rbow

    puts Col("Hello world!").bold.italic.strikethrough
    # No abbreviation for this

{% endhighlight %}

If formatting multiple strings, you are limited to using the `fmt` method.

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt [:red, :bold], [:green, :bold]
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt :rb, :gb
    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt "rb,rg"

    puts Col("Hello ", "world!").fmt [:italic, :underline], [:green, :on_white]
    # No abbreviation for [:italic, :underline]
{% endhighlight %}

Abbreviations are available if the format you wish to use comprises:
* at most one foreground color
* at most one style
* at most one background color

See [Abbreviations](#abbreviations) below for details.


### Classes, methods, return values

`Col(...)` and `Col[...]` create a `Col` object, whose only interesting methods are
`fmt` (to apply formatting) and `to_s`.  Any other method will be interpreted as
a format specifier.

`Col#fmt` returns a `String`:

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("string").fmt :red, :bold, :on_white    # -> String
    Col("string").fmt "rbow"                    # -> String
    Col("string").fmt :rbow                     # -> String
    Col("str1", "str2").fmt :rb, gi             # -> String

{% endhighlight %}

Directly-applied formatting methods return a `Col` object:

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("string").red                           # -> Col
    Col("string").red.bold                      # -> Col
    Col("string").red.bold.underscore.italic    # -> Col

{% endhighlight %}

Because `Col#to_s` is implemented, you can use `puts` directly on a `Col`
object:

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col("string").red.bold

{% endhighlight %}

Directly-applied _abbreviated_ formatting methods return a `String`:

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("string").rbow                          # -> String
      # internally converted to
      #   Col("string).fmt :red, :bold, :on_white

{% endhighlight %}

Incorrect use of Col results in a `Col::Error` being raised:

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("string").turquoise                    # non-existent format
    Col("one", "two).fmt :red, :green, :cyan   # too many arguments
    Col("string").gZow                         # invalid style: Z

{% endhighlight %}

### Abbreviations

Here are some illustrative examples of abbreviations you can use with `col`.

          Code             Effect(s) applied
     ---------------      -------------------
     Col["..."].g         green
     Col["..."].gb        green bold
     Col["..."]._b        bold
     Col["..."].gbow      green bold on_white
     Col["..."].g_ow      green on_white
     Col["..."].__ow      on_white
   
These examples show that the abbreviations are positional.  If you only want to
specify `on_white`, you must use underscores for the color and style properties.

Using these abbreviations, you can apply at most one color, at most one style,
and at most one background color.  These are listed in full here:

{% highlight ruby %}

    COLORS = {              STYLES = {                    BACKGROUND = {        
      'B' => :black,          'b' => :bold,                 'oB' => :on_black,  
      'r' => :red,            'd' => :dark,                 'or' => :on_red,    
      'g' => :green,          'i' => :italic,               'og' => :on_green,  
      'y' => :yellow,         'u' => :underline,            'oy' => :on_yellow, 
      'b' => :blue,           'U' => :underscore,           'ob' => :on_blue,   
      'm' => :magenta,        'k' => :blink,                'om' => :on_magenta,
      'c' => :cyan,           'r' => :rapid_blink,          'oc' => :on_cyan,   
      'w' => :white           'n' => :negative,             'ow' => :on_white   
    }                         'c' => :concealed,          }                     
                              's' => :strikethrough,
                            }                       

{% endhighlight %}
    
Note the following solutions to abbreviation clashes:

* `b` for blue, `B` for black
* `u` for underline, `U` for underscore
* `b` for bold; `k` for blink.

### Unabbreviated usage

Col is designed to make colorising a string (or collection of strings) easy, and
is optimised for the common case of applying a single color, a single style and
a background color.  If you need to apply more than one style to a single
string, you can send them all as methods:

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("text...").rapid_blink.strikethrough.negative.cyan

{% endhighlight %}

Or you can pass all of them, in full, to the `fmt` method.

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("text...").fmt [:rapid_blink, :strikethrough, :negative, :cyan]

{% endhighlight %}

If you are using `Col` to format a number of strings, `fmt` is your only option.

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col("one", "two", "three").fmt(
      [:green, :bold, :underline, :italic, :on_yellow],
      [:blue, :strikethrough, :dark, :blink],
      [:red]
    )

{% endhighlight %}

Naturally, the need for such usage should be extremely rare!

### Formatting multiple strings

Assuming your formatting needs are straightforward, the most convenient way to
format multiple strings is with a comma-separated format specification.

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col(str1, str2, ...).fmt "f1,f2,..."

{% endhighlight %}

For example:

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col("Name: ", name, "Age: ", age).fmt "y,rb,y,rb"

    # Equivalent to:
    puts Col("Name: ",  name,           "Age: ",   age           ).fmt \
             :yellow,   [:red, :bold],  :yellow,   [:red, :bold]

{% endhighlight %}

An alternative is to provide a list of strings or symbols:

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col("Name: ", name, "Age: ", age).fmt('y', 'rb', 'y', 'rb')
    puts Col("Name: ", name, "Age: ", age).fmt(:y, :rb, :y, :rb)

{% endhighlight %}

### Inline usage

An alternative way to format multiple strings is to use `Col.inline`.

{% highlight ruby %}

    Col.inline( str1, fmt1, str2, fmt2, ... )

{% endhighlight %}

For example:

{% highlight ruby %}

    puts Col.inline( "Hello ", :red, "world!", :blue)

    puts Col.inline(
      "Hello ",   [:red, :bold, :on_white],
      "world!",   :b_oy
    )

{% endhighlight %}

### Removing color codes from a string

`Col.uncolored` or `Col.plain` will remove any ANSI color codes from a string.

{% highlight ruby %}

    str = Col["foo"].yellow.bold.on_red.to_s
    Col.uncolored(str) == "foo"                 # true

{% endhighlight %}

### Windows users

People using a native Windows build of Ruby in the Windows console should
include the following code in their program:

{% highlight ruby %}

    require 'win32console'           # win32console gem
    include Win32::Console::ANSI

{% endhighlight %}

This does not apply to Cygwin users.

## Limitations

Col uses [Term::ANSIColor][1] to access ANSI codes, and offers access to all of
its codes/features _except_ `reset`.

[1]: http://flori.github.com/term-ansicolor/

The author of this library never applies anything other than a foreground color
and 'bold', so everything else is tested only in unit tests, not in practice.
Furthermore, the author has no knowledge of terminal issues and is just happy to
see a few colors appear in his Ruby 1.8 and 1.9 (Cygwin) programs -- no other
environment has been tested!


## Endnotes

### History

January 1 2012: Version 1.0.1 released (minor bug fix for 1.9.3)
July 25 2010: Version 1.0 released.

### Credits

Florian Flank for [Term::ANSIColor][1], which I've used heavily over the years.

### Motivation

I've used Term::ANSIColor many times and never sought anything more, but while
developing Attest, which makes much use of console color, I wanted an easier way
to apply color codes to groups of strings.  Additionally, being a unit testing
library, I didn't want to add methods to the String class, the way I normally do
when using Term::ANSIColor.

### Project details

* Author: Gavin Sinclair (user name: `gsinclair`; mail server: `gmail.com`)
* Date: July 2010
* Licence: MIT licence
* Project homepage: [http://gsinclair.github.com/col.html][home]
* Source code: [http://github.com/gsinclair/col][code]
* Documentation: [project homepage](home)

[home]: http://gsinclair.github.com/col.html
[code]: http://github.com/gsinclair/col

### Future plans

Version 1.0.0 was released with no plans for future releases.  Version 1.0.1
fixed a bug (18 months later), and still there are no plans for further
functionality.

One possible area of enhancement is to provide a way of disabling colored output
when outputing to a pipe.  (I believe Term::ANSIColor may already do that.)
(Sometimes, however, colored output in a pipe is desirable, viz. git.)
